FUENTE: B11
TITULO: From Empirical Data to Inter-Individual Interactions: Unveiling the Rules of Collective Animal Behavior — Cavagna et al.
ORIGINAL: material/externo/bibliografia-2/M3AS_20SUPPL.P1491.pdf
PAGINAS: 21

===== PAGINA 1 =====

See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/220048882



From empirical data to inter-individual interactions: Unveiling the rules of
collective animal behavior

Article in Mathematical Models and Methods in Applied Sciences · March 2010
DOI: 10.1142/S0218202510004660



CITATIONS                                                                                              READS

93                                                                                                     489

7 authors, including:

             Alessio Cimarelli                                                                                    Irene Giardina
             H24 Italia                                                                                           Italian National Research Council
             3 PUBLICATIONS 995 CITATIONS                                                                         129 PUBLICATIONS 8,376 CITATIONS

                SEE PROFILE                                                                                          SEE PROFILE



             Giorgio Parisi                                                                                       Raffaele Santagati
             Sapienza University of Rome                                                                          University of Bristol
             499 PUBLICATIONS 43,859 CITATIONS                                                                    91 PUBLICATIONS 4,144 CITATIONS

                SEE PROFILE                                                                                          SEE PROFILE




Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:



              Signal propagation and dynamic correlation in biological active matter View project



              Quantum ChromoDynamics View project




 All content following this page was uploaded by Raffaele Santagati on 24 July 2014.

 The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

===== PAGINA 2 =====

Mathematical Models and Methods in Applied Sciences
Vol. 20, Suppl. (2010) 14911510
. World Scienti¯c Publishing Company
#
c
DOI: 10.1142/S0218202510004660




          FROM EMPIRICAL DATA TO INTER-INDIVIDUAL
            INTERACTIONS: UNVEILING THE RULES OF
                COLLECTIVE ANIMAL BEHAVIOR


                                     ANDREA CAVAGNA
                            Istituto dei Sistemi Complessi (ISC-CNR),
                              Via dei Taurini 19, 00185 Rome, Italy
                                                 and
                                      Dipartimento di Fisica,
                              Universit a di Roma La Sapienza, Italy
                                   andrea.cavagna@roma1.infn.it

                                     ALESSIO CIMARELLI
                              Dipartimento di Fisica and ISC-CNR,
                                Universita di Roma La Sapienza,
                               P.le A. Moro 2, 00185 Rome, Italy
                                   alessio.cimarelli@gmail.com

                                      IRENE GIARDINA
                            Istituto dei Sistemi Complessi (ISC-CNR),
                              Via dei Taurini 19, 00185 Rome, Italy
                                                 and
                                       Dipartimento di Fisica,
                              Universit a di Roma La Sapienza, Italy
                                    irene.giardina@roma1.infn.it

                                       GIORGIO PARISI
                             Dipartimento di Fisica and IPCF-CNR,
                                Universita di Roma La Sapienza,
                               P.le A. Moro 2, 00185 Rome, Italy
                                   giorgio.parisi@roma1.infn.it

                                   RAFFAELE SANTAGATI
                            Istituto dei Sistemi Complessi (ISC-CNR),
                              Via dei Taurini 19, 00185 Rome, Italy
                                   ra®aele.sanatagati@gmail.com




                                              1491

===== PAGINA 3 =====

1492     A. Cavagna et al.


                                            FABIO STEFANINI*
                                    Dipartimento di Fisica and ISC-CNR,
                                      Universita di Roma La Sapienza,
                                     P.le A. Moro 2, 00185 Rome, Italy
                                     fabio.stefanini.star°ag@gmail.com

                                          RAFFAELE TAVARONE
                                    Dipartimento di Fisica and ISC-CNR,
                                      Universit
                                               a di Roma La Sapienza,
                                     P.le A. Moro 2, 00185 Rome, Italy
                                       ra®aele.tavarone@roma1.infn.it

                                     Received 16 January 2010
                                       Revised 23 March 2010
                  Communicated by N. Bellomo, N. Berestycki, F. Brezzi and J.-P. Nadal


       Animal groups represent magni¯cent archetypes of self-organized collective behavior. As such,
       they have attracted enormous interdisciplinary interest in the last years. From a mechanistic
       point of view, animal aggregations remind physical systems of particles or spins, where the
       individual constituents interact locally, giving rise to ordering at the global scale. This analogy
       has fostered important research, where numerical and theoretical approaches from physics have
       been applied to models of self-organized motion. In this paper, we discuss how the physics
       methodology may provide precious conceptual and technical instruments in empirical studies of
       collective animal behavior. We focus on three-dimensional groups, for which empirical data have
       been extremely scarce until recently, and describe novel experimental protocols that allow
       reconstructing aggregations of thousands of individuals. We show how an appropriate statistical
       analysis of these large-scale data allows inferring important information on the interactions
       between individuals in a group, a key issue in behavioral studies and a basic ingredient of
       theoretical models. To this aim, we revisit the approach we recently used on starling °ocks, and
       apply it to a much larger data set, never analyzed before. The results con¯rm our previous ¯ndings
       and indicate that interactions between birds have a topological rather than metric nature, each
       individual interacting with a ¯xed number of neighbors irrespective of their distances.

       Keywords: Collective behavior; °ocking; statistical methods.

       AMS Subject Classi¯cation: 22E46, 53C35, 57S20



1. Introduction
Collective behavior is a widespread phenomenon in animal groups, which has fasci-
nated scientists for long. Bird °ocks, ¯sh schools, insect swarms and mammal herds
are just a few common examples where large groups of individuals manage to
remarkably coordinate, exhibiting extraordinary collective patterns. In many of these
instances, there is no leader or external stimulus to guide the group, rather coordi-
nation occurs spontaneously as a consequence of the mutual interactions between
individuals 
              a mechanism known as self-organization.1


*Present address: Institut fr Neuroinformatik, Universitt Zrich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057 Zurich,
Switzerland.

===== PAGINA 4 =====

                                     From Empirical Data to Inter-Individual Interactions   1493


   How does self-organization emerge in a population of simple interacting individuals?
What are the dynamical rules followed by individuals, which lead to global coordi-
nation? These questions are central in behavioral ecology, but are also relevant in other
areas of science where self-organized collective phenomena have been observed,
including social science,2 economics,3 control theory,4 arti¯cial intelligence and coop-
erative robotics.5 From this point of view, animal groups represent paradigmatic
examples of complex behavior and have attracted a growing multi-disciplinary interest.
On the one hand, understanding the mechanistic aspect of group formation can o®er a
precious background to address cases where individuals are behaviorally more complex
and the relevant space highly multi-dimensional (pertaining, e.g. the action strategies
of a social agent rather than the coordinates and velocities of a moving bird). On the
other hand, collective animal behavior often has important biological functions (e.g.
anti-predatory, foraging, mating), the group ful¯lling collective tasks that go well
beyond the abilities of individuals. In this respect, it represents a powerful inspiration
to develop new schemes of distributed coordination, so as to achieve optimal control of
arti¯cial systems of interacting agents.
   From a closer perspective, complex systems have been the privileged arena for
much of frontier research in statistical physics and applied mathematics. Collective
behavior, in particular, is a fundamental concept in physics, being at the core of phase
transitions in condensed matter. The emergence of order and the progressive onset of
long-range correlations have been deeply investigated, providing with sophisticated
theoretical approaches, experimental protocols and numerical techniques. This
methodology represents a powerful tool of investigation and physicists have become
progressively interested in applying the physics framework to problems of inter-
disciplinary origin. Animal collective behavior represents a rather challenging
context in this respect. In the last decade, several groups dedicated intense e®ort to
develop numerical models and theoretical approaches to °ocking behavior.6 The
whole area of active matter (see Refs. 7, 8 and Refs. 9, 10 for a more mathematical
approach), which focuses on collective movement in systems with active components
(from driven granular matter to bacterial suspensions and animal groups), goes back
to simple °ocking models of self-propelled particles.11,12
   While the methodology of statistical physics has been largely exploited in theor-
etical studies, the same is not true for what concerns empirical investigations. Still, as
we shall discuss, physics provide a precious background to address several aspects of
empirical research on animal groups. As a matter of fact, empirical studies have been
limited for long to rather small aggregations (few tens of individuals). This lack of
large-scale data has severely restrained the feedback between theories and exper-
iments. As a consequence, models of self-organized motion have not been adequately
tested and many of their assumptions, even if reasonable, remained at a speculative
level. In this paper we will discuss how and why exporting the physics methodology to
empirical research on animal groups can remarkably improve this state of the art, both
concerning experimental techniques and data analysis. We will argue that an appro-
priate statistical analysis on large-scale data allows inferring important properties on

===== PAGINA 5 =====

1494   A. Cavagna et al.


the interactions at play between individuals in a group, providing crucial information
for further modeling. To this aim, we will focus on a speci¯c example, and revisit our
recent results on the topological nature of the interactions between birds in starling
°ocks.13 We will consider a larger data set (never analyzed before) and discuss in great
details the methods that can be used to investigate the °ocks structure and unveil the
topological character of interactions.


2. Exporting the Physics Methodology to Animal Collective Behavior
There are several reasons why physics can provide a useful reference framework for
understanding and analyzing collective animal behavior. Even if they have been
invoked in several works on °ocking, it may be useful to brie°y discuss a few of them.

. From a very general perspective, collective animal behavior is qualitatively di®er-
  ent, with emerging complex patterns, only when the number of individuals is large.
  In this respect, animal groups truly represent complex systems, in the sense so well
  stigmatized in the seminal paper \More is di®erent" by Phil Anderson.14 The
  behavior of the system as a whole cannot be directly inferred from the knowledge of
  the individual components, and small aggregations are not informative about col-
  lective behavior in large groups. In fact, some of the most stunning and peculiar
  collective phenomena, like panic waves in bird °ocks and ¯sh schools,15,16 or
  long-range correlations in orientational behavioral traits,17 only arise at large
  enough scales. Collective animal behavior therefore has a deep statistical meaning
  and considering large groups is a necessary prerequisite to truly understand it.
  Physicists are used to deal with large systems, and the whole approach of Statistical
  Physics precisely focuses on characterizing large-scale behavior and deducing it
  from micro-interactions.
. From a mechanistic point of view, emergence of self-organized collective behavior
  from local rules is similar to ordering in physical systems of particles or spins with
  short-range interactions. In animal groups, individuals are thought to obey simple
  behavioral rules based on imitation: they adjust their velocities to those of neigh-
  bors to coordinate their motion, are attracted to them not to lose the group, and
  keep minimum distances to avoid collisions.6 Local alignment of orientational
  degrees of freedom, and attraction–repulsion forces in space are known to occur in
  several systems in condensed matter. In ferromagnetism, for example, neighboring
  spins tend to align to each other giving rise to an ordered state at low enough
  temperature. Interestingly, ferromagnetic systems are considered the paradigm of
  order–disorder transitions, for which the theory of critical phenomena has been
  developed in the last ¯ve decades. Much is known on how to model them, and
  characterize large-scale collective properties. On the other hand, also attraction–
  repulsion forces are well-known in particle systems, and have been widely addressed
  in liquid theory and hydrodynamics. In animal groups, orientational degrees of
  freedom (the velocities) are coupled in a nontrivial way with structural ones (the

===== PAGINA 6 =====

                                    From Empirical Data to Inter-Individual Interactions   1495


  positions), as individuals continuously di®use while coordinating. Besides, animals
  are self-propelled and can move exploiting internal sources of energy, which makes
  the problem intrinsically of nonequilibrium. Still, the analogies with the physical
  systems mentioned above are strong. In fact, some of the most successful models of
  self-organized motion, the so-called self-propelled particle models,11 have been
  developed and studied using techniques from statistical physics and exploiting the
  reference to ferromagnetic and particle systems.7
. One of the most peculiar traits of animal collective behavior is the way groups react
  to perturbations. Bird °ocks, for example, sustain frequent predatory attacks
  retaining a remarkable degree of coherence and cohesion. A similar resilience to
  external disturbances can be observed in many other species and circumstances
  (e.g. predatory attacks, physical obstacles, rapid environmental changes, etc.).
  This collective e±ciency requires mechanisms ensuring fast information transfer
  and structural robustness. Explaining how this might occur is crucial to under-
  stand the evolutionary success of grouping and for applications in distributed
  arti¯cial systems. In physical systems response to perturbations is one of the main
  subjects of theoretical and experimental investigation. There are powerful concepts
  and well-established protocols, which can be exported to describe, quantify and
  interpret responsive behavior in animal groups.

Given these premises, we wish to proceed along the lines of this interdisciplinary
tradition, and bring a new contribution in empirical research on collective animal
behavior.


3. Empirical Analysis
Collecting data on animal groups can be a formidable task, especially when dealing
with 3D aggregations. Insects moving in two dimensions are small and can be kept
under laboratory control even in large numbers. The same is true when working at the
micro-scale, as with bacteria suspensions. On the contrary, when dealing with animals
moving in three dimensions, individuals often have larger sizes and naturally move in
a much larger environment. Laboratory control can be problematic, while techniques
for ¯eld observations may prove extremely complicated. All empirical analysis
previous to our work on bird °ocks, ¯sh schools and insect swarms were in fact limited
to very small groups (few tens of individuals).18,19 The reason was essentially a
technical one. Gathering empirical data corresponds to retrieve the 3D coordinates
and velocities for each individual in the group. Optical techniques and mainly
stereoscopy   are the way to do that. The main idea is rather simple: multiple and
synchronous photographs of the same object are taken, and stereometric formulas are
used to retrieve from the set of 2D coordinates on the photographs the 3D coordinates
in real space. When dealing with multiple objects, however, one needs ¯rst to ¯nd the
correct correspondence between the projected images of the same object on the
di®erent photographs. This matching problem can become extremely severe when

===== PAGINA 7 =====

1496   A. Cavagna et al.


groups are large and compact: photographic images of bird °ocks or insect swarms, for
example, are typically very dense sets of featureless points. In this case, standard
computer vision techniques are inadequate to solve the stereoscopic matching because
(i) they require levels of noise unattainable with current experimental technology;
(ii) they use probabilistic methods computationally nonexploitable with large num-
bers. Our approach was rather di®erent. Matching problems are well studied in
statistical physics and we largely exploited our background. Several assignment
algorithms exist, that can ¯nd the optimal matching given a measure in the space of
all possible matchings. For the stereoscopic case the crucial point is to ¯nd the good
measure. To this end, we used a pattern recognition principle, together with the
available information on the stereometric transformation. We developed a recursive
algorithm providing at each step a better measure, which was eventually integrated
with an assignment module, leading to the ¯nal match and the resulting 3D recon-
struction. Tests on synthetic data indicate an average e±ciency of 90% (number of
correct matches) on sets of several thousands points. Our aim here is not to describe in
details the reconstruction algorithm (the interested reader can refer to Ref. 20), but to
underline the crucial role that statistical physics played to solve the stereoscopic
matching. Thanks to this new algorithmic methodology, and to an experimental
apparatus optimally designed and calibrated (see Ref. 20), we could retrieve the 3D
coordinates of starling °ocks of up to four thousand individuals, making a leap for-
ward of two orders of magnitude beyond the previous state of the art.13,21 Here, we
will focus on data analysis and revisit some of the techniques that we developed to
investigate the structural properties of large aggregations


4. Looking for the Rules
Some of the main questions in collective animal behavior concerns the behavioral
rules obeyed by individuals during collective motion. Models assume dynamical rules,
which are local, each individual interacting only with a few neighbors. However, very
little is known about the real nature of such rules. Who are the interacting neighbors?
What are the forces between them? How do they depend on mutual distances? What
is the role of attraction, repulsion and mutual alignment? In this respect, empirical
analysis can prove crucial. In fact, inferring information on the rules from empirical
data is one of our major objectives.
    In statistical physics, going back from measurements to the unknown interactions
is known as the inverse problem. Some powerful and systematic approaches have
been developed to address the inverse problem and have been recently applied to
several biological networks. Maximum entropy models are probably the most
successful. In this approach, given a set of measurements, one looks for the set of
inter-individual interactions that maximizes the statistical occurrence of those
measurements. The general theory requires a good ensemble of independent obser-
vations to be able to retrieve the underlying interactions. The basic idea is that
enough empirical information should be available as an input, to ¯x all the unknown

===== PAGINA 8 =====

                                     From Empirical Data to Inter-Individual Interactions   1497


interaction pairs (or higher-order links). In fact, the method was successfully applied
to neurons in the vertebrate retina, where experiments provided correlation functions
for several samples and uncorrelated times.22 Unfortunately, the same approach is
not strictly possible for animal groups. In the case of °ocking, for example, di®erent
°ocks cannot be treated as di®erent samples of the same system. Besides, individuals
move through the aggregation, and the interaction network continuously changes in
time. Thus, even for a single °ock, measurements at di®erent times do not correspond
to the same statistical ensemble (i.e. are not macroscopic patterns generated by the
same set of birdbird interactions). Hopefully, however, additional information on
the nature of the interactions can be exploited to reduce the complexity of the search
space. As a starting point, therefore, we follow an alternative route. We leave aside
for a successive stage the possibility of retrieving the detailed interaction between any
two pairs of birds, and rather look for some more general property of the interactions,
which can be more easily inferred from our empirical data. As a ¯rst step, we need to
identify a strong tracer of the interactions. As birds in a °ock are strongly interacting,
we expect their structure in space and dynamical behavior to be di®erent from a
system of non-interacting individuals. It is likely that certain quantities will be more
a®ected than others. We will focus on those quantities, and try to extract from their
behavior information on the interactions.

4.1. The data set
Before proceeding with the statistical analysis, let us brie°y discuss the empirical data
set we have at our disposal. We performed stereoscopic experiments on starling °ocks
during aerial display over the roost, for two consecutive years (from mid-October to
mid-March in 20052006 and 20062007). High-resolution digital photographs were
shot at 10 frames per second, for a maximum of 40 consecutive images (due to memory
constraints of the cameras). The details of the experimental procedure can be found in
Ref. 20. Stereoscopic images of selected °ocking events were eventually processed with
our algorithmic procedure. In this way, we obtained the 3D reconstruction of
19 °ocking events. For each event, we have the space coordinates and velocities of
individual birds at each instant of time for up to 4 s. Remarkably, the reconstructed
°ocks are rather diversi¯ed in terms of the number of individuals (from a few hundred
to almost four thousand), dimensions, velocity and density (see Table 1). This turns
out to be crucial to unveil some important features of the inter-individual interactions.
A partial analysis of the structural properties of the events of the ¯rst season
(10 °ocks) appeared in Ref. 13. Here, we will consider the complete data set, which
includes the largest °ocks reconstructed so far (see Table 1).

4.2. The problem of the border
When investigating real °ocks, some features occur that are usually absent in
theoretical analysis and numerical investigations. Flocks, for example, have a well-
de¯ned border. On the one hand, the border represents a truly relevant biological

===== PAGINA 9 =====

1498   A. Cavagna et al.


       Table 1. Main global features of the analyzed °ocking events. Each value reported in this
       table is an average over all the instants of time (i.e. 3D reconstructions) belonging to that
       event. Events are numbered according to the session of data-taking (the ¯rst number in-
       dicates the day of the stereoscopic experiment, the second the photographic series within
       that day). The last nine events were reconstructed in 20062007 and were never analyzed
       before.
                                               Density         Nearest-neighbor        Velocity V
       Event        Number of birds N           (m 3 )         distance r1 (m)          (ms 1 )
       16-05               2631                  0.081                1.25                  15.2
       17-06                534                  0.08                 1.17                   9.1
       21-06                617                  0.24                 0.92                  11.2
       25-08               1360                  0.09                 1.14                  11.9
       25-10                834                  0.34                 0.82                  12.0
       25-11               1168                  0.38                 0.75                   8.8
       28-10               1246                  0.54                 0.67                  11.1
       29-03                448                  0.13                 0.99                  10.1
       31-01               1856                  0.04                 1.44                   6.9
       32-06                781                  0.8                  0.68                   9.6
       48-17                837                  0.12                 0.96                   9.5
       49-05                755                  0.84                 0.6                   13.8
       54-08               4150                  0.08                 1.21                  13.7
       57-03               3070                  0.09                 1.15                  12.3
       58-06                428                  0.45                 0.73                  10.2
       63-05                855                  0.15                 1.02                   9.9
       69-10               1108                  0.12                 1.06                  11.9
       69-13               1861                  0.15                 1.03                  11.7
       69-19                763                  0.37                 0.7                   13.3




property, which presumably has a strong in°uence on several collective patterns.
From this point of view, some of the most sophisticated theoretical analyses on
self-propelled particles remain poorly informative on animal groups, as they focus on
°uids of particles rather than ¯nite aggregations, do not take into account the
presence of a boundary, or assume periodic boundary conditions. On the other hand,
the presence of the border requires particular care during data analysis: birds on the
border have di®erent statistical properties simply because part of the space around
them is empty. Appropriate methods must be used to treat this statistical bias and
disentangle the e®ect of this positional anomaly from the e®ect of the interaction
between individuals.23 Therefore, the border of the °ock must be accurately ident-
i¯ed. As °ocks are not necessarily convex, the so-called convex hull is not a suitable
tool. Rather, to de¯ne the border we used the -shape algorithm24: basically one
excavates the set of 3D points (i.e. birds) with spheres of radius . For  ¼ 1 the
border coincides with the convex hull, whereas for ¯nite  concavities of size  are
detected. More speci¯cally, the scale  de¯nes a sub-complex of the Delaunay
triangulation (the -complex) including all the simplices, which have an empty
circumsphere with squared radius equal to or smaller than . The external surface of
this triangulation, the -shape, identi¯es the border (see Fig. 1). In our analysis we
choose the scale  as to locally maximize the density of the set, as shown in Fig. 2.

===== PAGINA 10 =====

                                                 From Empirical Data to Inter-Individual Interactions    1499




Fig. 1. (color online) Three-dimensional reconstruction of °ock 69-10, 1108 birds: red points correspond
to internal birds, while green points 
                                       obtained using the alpha-shape algorithm 
                                                                                   identify birds on the
border.




                                         0.14




                               Density
                                         0.12




                                          0.1
                                             1            10                100
                                                           α

Fig. 2. Density of internal points as a function of the parameter , for the °ock of Fig. 1. The density is
computed dividing the number of internal birds (i.e. birds that do not belong to the border) by the volume
enclosed in the -shape. When  is in¯nite, the -shape coincides with the convex hull. As  decreases, the
algorithm excavates the set of points with a higher resolution. If concavities are present in the shape of the
°ock, when  is of the order of the concavities scale, the -shape volume suddenly decreases, giving rise to a
jump in the density. At small values of , the algorithm penetrates the °ock, progressively eroding points
and leading to a decrease in density. The optimal choice is therefore to consider the value of  where the
density is maximal.



This corresponds approximately to considering the smallest concavities without
penetrating inside the °ock. Boundary e®ects in all statistical indicators are then
cured using the Hanish method.25

4.3. The anisotropy
Statistical physics teaches us that the e®ect of interactions is mostly seen in corre-
lation functions and two-point observables. In the case of °ocks, we can consider
either structural properties (describing how individuals are distributed in space) or
orientational ones, (pertaining to the degree of mutual alignment). Here, we focus on

===== PAGINA 11 =====

1500                                 A. Cavagna et al.


structural features and leave to the ¯nal section a few comments on orientational
degrees of freedom.
    One of the simplest quantities that can be computed with a set of 3D coordinates
is the nearest-neighbor distribution. Given a reference bird i, we consider the nearest-
neighbor (1n) and compute its distance di ¼ jr1n  ri j and normalized displacement
ui ¼ ðr1n  ri Þ=di from i. Looking at all the birds in the group, we can measure the
distribution of absolute distances and angular displacements of nearest neighbors.
This last quantity appears to be particularly interesting. Let us consider as a refer-
                                                                    P        P
ence direction the (normalized) average velocity of the °ock V ¼ i vi =j i vi j, and
measure the distribution of cosðÞ ¼ ui  V. The result is shown in Fig. 3(a) for a

                             0.6
                                                                                                                                                    0.3




Probability distribution P                                                                                              Probability difference S
                                                                                                                                                   0.25

                             0.5                                                                                                                    0.2

                                                                                                                                                   0.15

                                                                                                                                                    0.1
                             0.4
                                                                                                1 nn
                                                                                                2 nn                                                                          nc
                                                                                                5 nn
                                                                                                                                                   0.05
                                                                                                7 nn
                                                                                                                                                     0
                             0.3
                                -1          -0.5           0                                    0.5           1                                       0    2    4   6         8    10   12   14   16
                                                         cos(θ)                                                                                                 Order of neighbour n

                                                     (a)                                                                                                                (b)

                                                                                        0.6




                                                           Probability distribution P
                                                                                        0.5




                                                                                        0.4




                                                                                        0.3
                                                                                           -1          -0.5             0                                 0.5       1
                                                                                                                   cos(θ)

                                                                                                                  (c)

Fig. 3. (color online) (a) Probability distribution P of the cosine of the angle between the nearest-neighbor
vector and the direction of motion, for °ocking event 69-10. The curve is an average over all the instants of
time belonging to the event. The black horizontal line corresponds to the isotropic case, when neighbors are
uniformly distributed around the focal individual. The dotted vertical lines identify the reference angles
used in the computation of the probability di®erence S (see text and (c)). (b) Probability distributions for
the ¯rst (red), second (blue), ¯fth (green) and seventh (brown) nearest neighbors. (c) Relative probability
di®erence S of ¯nding the nth neighbor below a reference angle with the direction of motion, as a function of
the order of the neighbor n. To compute S, we identify the range where the probability P is lower than the
isotropic case (e.g. jcosðÞj < 0:7 in this example, see vertical lines in (a)) and calculate in this range the
relative integrated probability di®erence with the isotropic case. The value where the curve drops below 0,
identi¯es the interaction range.

===== PAGINA 12 =====

                                    From Empirical Data to Inter-Individual Interactions    1501


single °ocking event. We can see that there is a signi¯cant drop in probability for
values of cosðÞ close to þ1 and 1. In other terms, it is rather unlikely to ¯nd the
nearest neighbor along the direction of motion.
   This anisotropy in the angular distribution of neighbors is necessarily a con-
sequence of the interaction at play between birds: in a system of non-interacting
individuals, neighbors would be isotropically distributed in space and P ðcosðÞÞ
would be constant and equal to 1/2. If we repeat the same analysis for the second
nearest neighbor, a similar distribution is obtained, but with a less pronounced
anisotropy. Increasing the order of the considered neighbor, P ðcosðÞÞ progressively
becomes °atter: in the event of Fig. 3(a), for the seventh nearest neighbor P is very
close to an isotropic distribution of points (Fig. 3(b)). As anisotropy is a consequence
of the underlying interactions, this ¯nding indicates that (i) interaction is strong
between a bird and its closest neighbors so as to signi¯cantly modify their mutual
positioning; (ii) interaction decays as the order of the neighbor increases. Interest-
ingly then, if we are able to quantify this decay, we can estimate the range of the
interaction and investigate how it depends on some a priori relevant parameters of
the °ock (density, velocity, dimensions etc.). This would provide novel and import-
ant information on the dynamical rules followed by individuals.


4.4. Estimating the range of the interaction
To estimate the range of the interaction, we need a sharp statistical indicator of the
degree of anisotropy. As a ¯rst possibility, we can consider P ðcosðÞÞ and quantify
how much it di®ers from the isotropic value 1/2: the larger this di®erence, the larger
the anisotropy. This can be done, for example, by measuring the relative probability
di®erence of ¯nding a neighbor below some reference angle, as compared to the
isotropic case (Fig. 3(a)). If we repeat the procedure for di®erent orders n of the
considered neighbor, we obtain the curve SðnÞ displayed in Fig. 3(c): as expected
SðnÞ decays as n increases, reaching the non-interacting value (0 in this case) for a
certain value nc , that we can identify as the interaction range.
   SðnÞ provides an intuitive quanti¯cation of the anisotropy. It is not, however, an
optimal one: it slightly depends on the reference angles used to evaluate the integral,
and especially in small aggregations it su®ers of large relative °uctuations. It would
be desirable to ¯nd more robust statistical indicators. To this aim, we introduce a
more sophisticated quantity, the Anisotropy Matrix13:

                                    ðnÞ    1 X
                                             N
                                 M ; ¼       u u                                       ð4:1Þ
                                           N i i i

where, as before, ui represents the normalized distance vector of the nth nearest
neighbor of bird i. The matrix M is the sum over many projectors: the operator indeed
projects over the direction of the nth nearest neighbor of i. As a consequence, the
eigenvectors of M have a particular meaning. If we call 1 < 2 < 3 the three

===== PAGINA 13 =====

1502   A. Cavagna et al.


eigenvalues of M, and w1 ; w2 ; w3 the corresponding eigenvectors, then w1 and w3
represent, respectively, the directions where the nth nearest neighbor of a reference
bird is statistically less and more likely to be found. This property can be exploited to
quantify the anisotropy in the neighbors distribution and monitor its decay.
     From the analysis of P ðcosðÞÞ we know that nearest neighbors are less abundant
along the direction of motion V (Fig. 3). Therefore, we expect the lowest eigenvector
w1 to be quite similar to V and their scalar product to be rather close to 1. When the
order of the considered neighbor increases, the anisotropy is quantitatively less
pronounced so that this scalar product must become smaller. The squared scalar
product  1 ðnÞ ¼ ðw1  VÞ 2 seems therefore a good candidate to measure the degree of
anisotropy. To this aim, however, it is important to establish ¯rst what is the value
this function would have when individuals are not interacting and the distribution of
neighbors is isotropic. In this case, the three eigenvectors w1 ; w2 ; w3 are only
determined by ¯nite size °uctuations and are statistically uncorrelated with V, as
there is not any a priori privileged direction in space. The average value of  1 ðnÞ can
be easily computed by assuming w1 to be uniformly distributed on the unitary
sphere. The same holds when considering the gamma functions  2 ðnÞ and  3 ðnÞ
associated with the other two eigenvectors, and one gets for the isotropic case:
 iso
  1 ðnÞ ¼  2 ðnÞ ¼  3 ðnÞ ¼ 1=3.
             iso         iso

     The behavior of  1 ðnÞ as a function of n is shown in Fig. 4 (red curve) for three
°ocking events. This curve is in fact an average: we diagonalized ¯rst the anisotropy
matrix and computed ðw1  VÞ 2 for each single-time 3D reconstruction, and we then
averaged over all the instants of time partaking the event. The function  1 ðnÞ
exhibits, as expected     
                            a neat decaying behavior from a large value at n ¼ 1 to the
isotropic non-interacting value 1/3. The order of the neighbor where  1 ðnÞ becomes
comparable to  iso1 ðnÞ ¼ 1=3 can be identi¯ed as the interaction range nc . To further
support this procedure, we can consider the gamma functions corresponding to the
other two eigenvectors of the anisotropy matrix,  2 ðnÞ and  3 ðnÞ (Fig. 4, curves green
and blue). We recall that the maximal eigenvector of M identi¯es the direction of
maximal crowding. Therefore, the behavior of  3 ðnÞ indicates that nearest neighbors
are preferably located on the plane orthogonal to the direction of motion (as also
suggested by Fig. 3). This is another e®ect of the anisotropy in the distribution of
neighbors, which progressively fades away as the order of the neighbor increases. All
the three gamma functions then cross at n  nc and °uctuate around 1/3 for farther
neighbors, consistently with the fact that the distribution of neighbors is isotropic
beyond nc .
     The anisotropy matrix and the gamma functions provide a systematic and robust
protocol to estimate the interaction range. Focusing on an aggregated quantity (M ),
we exploited the advantage of dealing with large samples, reducing the e®ect of
bird-to-bird °uctuations. Besides, averaging over measurements at di®erent instants
of time we further limited statistical °uctuations due to ¯nite size e®ects. In this way
we could compute a scalar quantity,  1 ðnÞ, which on one hand encodes the infor-
mation on the anisotropy in an e±cient and compact way, on the other hand exhibits

===== PAGINA 14 =====

                                                                     From Empirical Data to Inter-Individual Interactions   1503

                                                             1

                                                                                               49-05




                                  Degree of anisotropy γ
                                                           0.8


                                                           0.6


                                                           0.4


                                                           0.2
                                                                                          nc
                                                            0
                                                             0   2     4   6    8    10   12     14    16
                                                                       Order of neighbour n
                                                             1
                                                                                               63-05




                                  Degree of anisotropy γ
                                                           0.8


                                                           0.6


                                                           0.4


                                                           0.2
                                                                                     nc
                                                            0
                                                             0   2     4   6    8    10   12     14    16
                                                                       Order of neighbour n
                                                             1
                                                                                               69-10




                                  Degree of anisotropy γ
                                                           0.8


                                                           0.6


                                                           0.4


                                                           0.2
                                                                                nc
                                                            0
                                                             0   2     4   6    8    10   12     14    16
                                                                       Order of neighbour n

Fig. 4. (color online) Anisotropy gamma factors  1 (red circles),  2 (green triangles) and  3 (blue squares)
for three °ocking events (49-05; 63-05; 69-10). Each curve is an average over all instants of time belonging
to the °ocking event, error bars are standard errors. The interaction range nc is identi¯ed as the point
where the function  1 reaches the isotropic value 1/3 (black horizontal line), and is computed using a linear
¯t of the curve close to the intersection. The three gamma functions meet together approximately at nc , as
expected, and °uctuate around the isotropic value.


a smooth decaying behavior. We stress that to achieve such a result, it was crucial
dealing with large groups and taking care of boundary e®ects. Birds on the border or
close to it necessarily have their neighbors on one side. This neighbor location is not
determined however by the interaction between individuals, rather it is a trivial e®ect
of the shape of the °ock (e.g. birds in front of the group have all neighbors behind,
while birds on the left side have all neighbors on their right etc.). It is easy to check
that even for a random aggregation of points, where neighbors are distributed iso-
tropically, computing P ðcosðÞÞ and the gamma functions in a naive way does not
give the expected isotropic value.23 As our aim is to use the anisotropy as a tracer of
the interaction, we need to eliminate this bias. Luckily, statistical methods exist to
this purpose. We followed the Hanish method25: when computing observables relative
to the nth neighbors we considered only birds for which the nth neighbor was at a
distance smaller than the distance to the border of the °ock. In this way one obtains

===== PAGINA 15 =====

1504   A. Cavagna et al.


an unbiased statistics, which can however be much smaller than the original one
(especially for large n, when many points must be discarded). For this reason large
aggregations are mandatory to obtain signi¯cative results.

4.5. Topological versus metric interactions
Once established a good statistical indicator and a procedure to measure the degree of
anisotropy, we applied it to all the °ocking events in our data sets, and computed for
each of them the corresponding interaction range nc . Inspection of the results shows
that nc slightly varies from °ock to °ock, as can also be seen in Fig. 4. This must come
as no surprise. nc is an estimate of the typical number of interacting neighbors and
has been computed using averaged quantities on ¯nite aggregations of points. Any
measurement on ¯nite groups is expected to deviate from the true value, with group-
to-group °uctuations that are smaller, the larger their sizes. The point is not whether
nc varies from one °ock to the other, but whether this change is a natural statistical
°uctuation or, rather, is determined by some speci¯c parameter of the °ock. The
relation with the °ocks density, in particular, plays a crucial role. Let us discuss why.
    Most models of self-organized motion assume that during collective behavior
individuals interact with neighbors within a well-de¯ned range in space. Interactions,
in other terms, depend on mutual metric distances. This is what happens in all
physical systems and may seem a reasonable assumption even for animal groups, as
several perceptual abilities of individuals decay with distance. If this hypothesis is
correct, there is an interaction range rc , which is ¯xed in meters. In this case, the
number of neighbors a bird is interacting with crucially depends on the density of the
group: in dense aggregations individuals are close to one another and many neighbors
will fall within interaction range rc ; on the contrary, in sparse aggregations only a few
neighbors will satisfy this condition. Thus, the number of interacting neighbors nc
should increase with increasing density. This is not, however, the only possibility. It is
well known that in many social networks it is not the physical distance in space
between nodes that matters, and other topologies are the relevant ones. In the case of
°ocks, for example, one may argue that the relevant quantity is not how far apart two
birds are (metric distance), but how many intermediate individuals separate them
(topological distance). If this topological scenario holds, interaction decays with
order of neighborhood and there is a well-de¯ned topological range nc : each indi-
vidual interacts with the ¯rst nc neighbors, irrespective of their distances. In this case
the number of interacting neighbors nc would not depend on density, but their
distance would.
    Our empirical results can help to distinguish in a sharp way between these two
scenarios. The anisotropy matrix allowed us to extract an interaction range in terms of
the number of neighbors, nc , that we may now call topological range. For a given °ock,
however, the same procedure also provides with a metric interaction range in space, rc .
For homogeneous aggregations       as °ocks are, to a good approximation      there
is indeed a very clear relationship between the order of the neighbor n and its average

===== PAGINA 16 =====

                                                                  From Empirical Data to Inter-Individual Interactions                  1505


distance rn :
                                                                        4 3
                                                                   n/    r  ;                                                        ð4:2Þ
                                                                        3 n
or, more conveniently
                                                                                             rn
                                                               n 1=3 /  1=3 rn                ;                                      ð4:3Þ
                                                                                             r1
 being the density, and r1   1=3 the average nearest-neighbor distance. Empirical
data follow nicely this behavior, as can be seen in Fig. 5. As a consequence, the gamma
functions de¯ned in the previous section can be easily expressed in terms of distances,
the decay of the anisotropy monitored in physical space, and a metric interaction
range rc identi¯ed.
   For a single °ock, the topological and the metric range are equivalent descriptions
of the decay of the inter-individual interaction and are related by the homogeneity
relationship
                                               r
                                       n 1=3
                                         c   / c :                                  ð4:4Þ
                                               r1
When °ocks of di®erent densities are considered, however, these two quantities must
behave in a di®erent way and cannot be both density-independent          as Eq. (4.4)
clearly shows. If the nature of the interaction between birds is metric, then the metric
                                                                                    1=3
interaction range rc must remain constant with varying the density, while n c
should grow linearly with the nearest-neighbor distance r1 . On the contrary, if the
interaction is topological, nc should remain constant, and rc must grow linearly with

                       4
                                                                                       0.8
                               25-11




 Average distance rn
                       3       63-07
                                                                                       0.6


                       2                                                   Density ρ   0.4


                       1                                                               0.2


                       0                                                                0
                           1           1.5         2             2.5                     0          1      2       3        4             5
                                                         1/3                                                                      -3
                                  Order of neighbour n                                          Nearest neighbour distance (r1)

                                             (a)                                                           (b)
Fig. 5. (a) Average distance of the nth nearest neighbor as a function of the order of the neighbor n 1=3 , for
two °ocking events. The straight lines are linear ¯ts of the data (reduced chi-squared 10 5 ). The Hanish
method is used to compute average distances, in order to eliminate the border bias. (b) Density of the
aggregation as a function of the average nearest-neighbor distance r 3  1 . Each point corresponds to a
distinct °ocking event and is an average over all instants of time belonging to that event (error bars are
standard errors). The straight line is a linear ¯t of the data (reduced chi-squared ¼ 4  10 4 ). The linear
correlation between density and r 3
                                  1 shows that the average nearest-neighbor distance is a reliable measure
of the sparseness of the °ock.

===== PAGINA 17 =====

1506                       A. Cavagna et al.


                           1                                                                      4

-1/3                                                                                             3.5




  Topological range nc
                                                                               Metric range rc
                                                                                                  3

                         0.5                                                                     2.5

                                                                                                  2

                                                                                                 1.5

                          0                                                                        1
                                 0.6       0.8         1    1.2        1.4                             0.6       0.8         1    1.2        1.4
                                       Nearest neighbour distance r1                                         Nearest neighbour distance r1

                                                 (a)                                                                   (b)
                                                       1=3
Fig. 6.                        (a) Topological range n c    as a function of the average nearest-neighbor distance r1 . There is no
signi¯cative correlation between these two quantities, rather the topological range °uctuates around the
average value hnc i 1=3 (black line), where hnc i ¼ 7:04  0:6. (b) Metric range rc as a function of the average
nearest-neighbor distance r1 . In this case an evident linear correlation exists (reduced chi-squared 8  10 2 ,
straight black line). These results indicate that the interaction between birds has a topological nature, each
individual interacting with a ¯xed number of neighbors, irrespective of their distances.




Fig. 7. (color online) Pictorial representation of a topological interaction: the number of interacting
neighbors (in light blue) is the same in dense (left) and sparse (right) aggregations; on the contrary the
metric range changes, being smaller the denser the °ock (dotted circle).


r1 . Our data set comprises °ocking events with a wide range of densities and therefore
                                                                                   1=3
allows one to investigate this issue thoroughly. Figure 6 shows the behavior of n c
and rc as a function of the nearest-neighbor distance r1 . The result indicates very
clearly that the interaction has a topological nature, supporting the conclusion of
Ref. 13, where half of the °ocking events were considered in the analysis. Thus, in
starling °ocks each bird interacts with a ¯xed number of neighbors irrespective of
their distances (see Fig. 7): averaging over all °ocking events we get hnc i ¼
7:04  0:6, improving the previous empirical estimate of this number given in Ref. 13.


5. Conclusions
Our empirical analysis shows that the interaction at play between starlings during
°ocking has a topological nature, each bird coordinating with a ¯xed number of
interacting neighbors during motion, approximately seven, irrespective of their dis-
tances. This ¯nding overturns one of the fundamental hypotheses of most models of
self-organized motion, which assumed interactions depending on metric distances.

===== PAGINA 18 =====

                                    From Empirical Data to Inter-Individual Interactions   1507


From a broader perspective, it fosters a number of important questions, which may
help to improve our understanding of collective animal behavior and in°uence future
research in this ¯eld.
    Collective behavior in animals often has functional motivations, being in a group
proving advantageous under many circumstances. Understanding how the group
acquires its collective skills and which mechanisms grant functional e±ciency is a
central issue both in evolutionary ecology and in applications to arti¯cial systems. In
the case of starlings, as in many other bird species, °ocking mainly serves as a strong
anti-predatory strategy. In this perspective one must expect that behavioral rules
have been evolutionarily selected to enhance those group features that are crucial to
this function: a strong cohesion of the group, robust to external perturbations (i.e.
resilient to predator attacks); and an equally strong coherence, to change rapidly
group direction when necessary. We remain truly impressed when observing a °ock
dodging a falcon attack: the group undergoes sudden density variations, expanding,
contracting, and changing shape and direction. Still, it always remains cohesive,
leaving no stragglers behind. Interestingly, metric interactions are not well suited to
sustain such behavior. If each bird interacts with neighbors within a ¯xed metric
range, when the °ock expands the number of such neighbors drastically decreases,
and several individuals may lose connection with the group remaining isolated (and,
therefore, easy preys). Topological interactions, on the contrary, do not su®er any
dampening with density variations as their ranges do not depend on metric distance.
Indeed numerical simulations show that topological interactions make the group
much more °exible and resilient to external perturbations, either disruptive as pre-
dators, either passive as mere obstacles.13 Therefore, we can argue that birds in a
°ock interact topologically because these interactions guarantee a much more robust
cohesion to the group, enhancing their chance of survival.
    The behavioral rules followed by individuals fully determine the collective features
of the group. On the other hand, such rules ultimately depend on complicated bio-
logical processes at individual level. The sensorimotor apparatus and the cognitive
information processing capabilities of the individuals necessarily constrain the way
animals interact with one another, determining the behavioral rules they follow.
Understanding how this occurs may not be trivial. In °ocking, vision is known to be
the main channel through which individuals interact. Still, it may not be vision in
itself what matters. In particular, birds perform an elaboration of the visual signal,
which goes beyond mere perception, and display prenumeric subitizing abilities (i.e.
object tracking). This may play a crucial role in determining behavioral rules. For
example, it has been shown in some empirical works that seven is the maximum
number of objects that birds can discriminate.26 We ¯nd a very similar value for the
number of interacting neighbors. It is possible that the two ¯ndings are in fact
related, and that each individual considers its ¯rst seven neighbors to coordinate
with, because this is the maximum number of individuals it can track. Obviously, this
hypothesis needs to be investigated further, but the topological nature of the inter-
action may in fact be related to a nontrivial cognitive ability.

===== PAGINA 19 =====

1508   A. Cavagna et al.


   As topological interactions enhance robust cohesion in °ocking, we can see that
sensory-cognitive constraints on the one hand shape the individual dynamics; on the
other hand, they ensure e±cient group behavior. In a way, individual cognition scales
up to collective information processing skills. It is not evident that topological
interactions do play the same role in all other instances of collective behavior. We
expect them to occur whenever structural robustness is functional to the group and
compatible with individual abilities. Comparative empirical research on di®erent
species can help to investigate this issue. Hopefully, we will understand what rules are
better suited to achieve certain collective tasks, given speci¯c constraints on group
members.
   At methodological level, our approach has focused on correlation functions. The
anisotropy gamma functions are in fact nothing else but some kind of nonstandard
structural two-point functions. What we have done can be rephrased by saying that
we measured the correlation length of this anisotropy function and used it as an
estimate of the interaction range. This procedure makes perfect sense. Statistical
physics teaches us that when the correlation length is ¯nite, it is indeed proportional
to the interaction range. Being more cautious, we can say that nc provides an upper
bound for the interaction range, as usually correlations extend beyond the range of
direct interactions. The most important point is, however, that this estimated range
does not depend on density, unequivocally showing the topological character of the
interaction. We note also that nc does not show any signi¯cant correlation with other
parameters of the °ock, like size, number of birds, velocity and degree of alignment,
supporting its identi¯cation as a bona ¯de interaction range.
   The analysis presented in this paper concerns structural degrees of freedom. We
investigated properties relative to the distribution in space of individuals, which are
mainly determined by the attractionrepulsion forces between birds. In this respect,
the interaction range that we found is, strictly speaking, relative to this structural
component of the interaction. Still, an important contribution to the interaction is
given by mutual velocity alignment and concerns orientational degrees of freedom.
Just as attraction forces are crucial to ensure cohesion in the group, alignment
strongly determines the degree of global coordination. Here, we unveiled the topo-
logical nature of structural forces, arguing that it ensures robust cohesion, enhancing
response to predation. In the same way, we can ask whether orientational degrees of
freedom also interact topologically and what kind of alignment interaction can grant
e±cient global coordination. To answer this question, one can follow the same
strategy that we used in this paper: identify a correlation function, which is mostly
a®ected by the interaction and monitor its decay. We recently performed such an
analysis in Ref. 17, where we studied velocity correlation functions for the same
events discussed in this paper. What we found was startling: velocity correlations in
°ocks are scale-free and span the entire group with minimal decay. On the one hand,
this result tells us that °ocks are coherent in the strongest possible way, such that the
collective response to perturbations, in terms of orientational changes, is maximal.
On the other hand, scale-free behavior implies that correlations do not have a

===== PAGINA 20 =====

                                       From Empirical Data to Inter-Individual Interactions   1509


well-de¯ned length-scale related to the original interaction range: direct inspection of
these functions cannot therefore be used to trace back this range, as we did with the
anisotropy. More sophisticated approaches, like maximum entropy models integrated
with empirically based hypothesis, may provide this information. Work in this
direction is underway.

References
 1. S. Camazine, J.-L. Deneubourg, N. R. Franks, J. Sneyd, G. Theraulaz and E. Bonabeau,
    Self-Organization in Biological Systems (Princeton Univ. Press, 2001).
 2. D. Helbing, I. J. Farkas and T. Vicsek, Simulating dynamical features of escape panic,
    Nature 407 (2000) 487490.
 3. R. Cont and J.-P. Bouchaud, Herd behaviour and aggregate °uctuations in ¯nancial
    markets, Macroecon. Dynam. 4 (2000) 170196.
 4. A. Jadbabaie, J. Lin and S. Morse, Coordination of groups of mobile autonomous agents
    using nearest neighbour rules, IEEE Trans. Auto. Control 48 (2003) 9881001.
 5. Y. U. Cao, A. S. Fukunaga and A. B. Kahng, Cooperative mobile robotics: Antecedents
    and directions, Autonomous Robots 4 (1997) 123.
 6. I. Giardina, Collective behavior in animal groups: Theoretical models and empirical
    studies, HFSP J. 2 (2008) 205219.
 7. J. Toner and Y. Tu, Flocks, herds, and schools: A quantitative theory of °ocking, Phys.
    Rev. E 58 (1998) 48284858.
 8. J. Toner Y. Tu and S. Ramaswamy, Hydrodynamics and phases of °ocks, Ann. Phys. 318
    (2005) 170244.
 9. Special Issue on Mathematics and Complexity in Human and Life Sciences, Math. Models
    Methods Appl. Sci. 19 (Suppl.) (2009) 1385.
10. N. Bellomo, C. Bianca and M. Delitala, Complexity analysis and mathematical tools
    towards the modelling of living systems, Phys. Life Rev. 6 (2009) 144175.
11. T. Vicsek, A. Czirok, E. Ben-Jacob, I. Cohen and O. Shochet, Novel type of phase
    transition in a system of self-driven particles, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 (1995) 12261229.
12. G. Gregoire and H. Chate, Onset of collective and cohesive motion, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92
    (2004) 025702.
13. M. Ballerini, N. Cabibbo, R. Candelier, A. Cavagna, E. Cisbani, I. Giardina, V. Lecomte,
    A. Orlandi, G. Parisi, A. Procaccini, M. Viale and V. Zdravkovic, Interaction ruling
    animal collective behaviour depends on topological rather than metric distance: Evidence
    from a ¯eld study, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105 (2008) 12321237.
14. P. W. Anderson, More is di®erent, Science 177 (1972) 393396.
15. A. Procaccini et al., Agitation waves inside Starling (Sturnus vulgaris) °ocks under
    predator attack, submitted (2009).
16. F. Gerlotto, S. Bertrand, N. Bez and M. Gutierrez, Waves of agitation inside anchovies
    school observed with multibeam sonar: A way to transmit information in response to
    predation, ICES J. Marine. Sci. 63 (2006) 14051417.
17. A. Cavagna, A. Cimarelli, I. Giardina, G. Parisi, R. Santagati, F. Stefanini and M. Viale,
    Scale-free correlations in starling °ocks, Proc. Nat'l. Acad. Sci. USA 107 (2010)
    1186511870.
18. Eds. J. K. Parrish and W. M. Hammer, Animal Groups in Three Dimensions (Cambridge
    Univ. Press, 1997).
19. N. C. Manoukis et al., Structure and dynamics of male swarms of Anopheles gambiae,
    J. Med. Enthom. 46 (2009) 227235.

===== PAGINA 21 =====

1510          A. Cavagna et al.


20. A. Cavagna, I. Giardina, A. Orlandi, G. Parisi, A. Procaccini, M. Viale and V. Zdravkovic,
    The STARFLAG handbook on collective animal behaviour: 1. Empirical methods, Anim.
    Behav. 76 (2008) 217236.
21. M. Ballerini, N. Cabibbo, R. Candelier, A. Cavagna, E. Cisbani, I. Giardina, A. Orlandi,
    G. Parisi, A. Procaccini, M. Viale and V. Zdravkovic, Empirical investigation of starling
    °ocks: A benchmark study in collective animal behaviour, Anim. Behav. 76 (2008)
    201215.
22. E. Schneidman, M. J. Berry, R. Segev and W. Bialek, Weak pairwise correlations imply
    strongly correlated network states in a neural population, Nature 440 (2006) 10071012.
23. A. Cavagna, I. Giardina, A. Orlandi, G. Parisi and A. Procaccini, The STARFLAG
    handbook on collective animal behaviour: 2. Three-dimensional analysis, Anim. Behav. 76
    (2008) 237248.
24. H. Edelsbrunner and E. P. Mucke, Three-dimensional alpha shapes, ACM Trans.
    Graphics 13 (1994) 4372.
25. D. Stoyan and H. Stoyan, Fractals, Random Shapes and Point Fields (John Wiley and
    Sons, 2004).
26. J. D. Delius Emmerton, in Vision, Brain and Behaviour, eds. H. P. Zeigler and H. J.
    Bischof (MIT Press, 1993).




View publication stats
